
Transformer Architecture
    
    2017 - Google published Trnasformer architecture - "Attention
    is all you need"
    
    2018 - GPT-1 / BERT
    
    2019 - GPT-2
    
    2020 - GPT-3
    
    2022 - ChatGPT and RLHF (Reinforcement Learning from Human
    Feedback)
    
    2024 - GPT-4o
    
    
    "Emergent Intelligence" - coming from scale of predictive
    modeling


    Prompt Engineering - prompting for best results
    Custom GPTs - custom data training
    Copilots - code assistants, planners etc.
    Agentization - Autonomy and specialization, planning tasks.

Parameters / Weights
    Has grown logarithmically

    GPT 1 - 117M
    GPT 2 - 1.5B
    GPT 3 - 175B
    GPT 4 - 1.76T

    Latest model somewhere around 10 trillion

    Opensource:
    Gemma - 2B
    Llama 3.1 8 / 70 / 405 B variants
    Mixtral 140B


Tokenization

    units passed into a model

    Early neural networks trained character by character - limited input and managable vocabulary size.
    Challenge: so much required understanding of composition of words to be captured in weights.

Neural networks trained off each word, building the "vocab" of words and transforming into tokens.
    Challenge: Enormous sizes of vocabs due to unknown words, rarites etc.

Breakthrough was to work on 'chunks' of words (Morphemes?)
due to tokenization, can handle place names etc. and good at handling word stems, like noun -> verb transitions.

GPT Tokenizer
- for common words, maps 1 word -> 1 token
- for uncommon words, more breakdown of tokens.
- Breaks (grammar) important in tokenization.

GPT long numbers tokenized to 3 digit sequences. 

Rule of Thumb - 1 token maps to ~4 characters (English), 1000 tokens ~ 750 words.



CONTEXT WINDOW

- total number of tokens an llm can consider when genreating the next token.

Includes the original input (system) prompt, subsequent converstation and the latest (user) prompts. 

This governs how well the model can remember or reference previous content.

"Memory" is an illusion - every time you talk to ChatGPT - every input is put in as a prompt.


MODEL API COSTS

Chat interfaces have "Pro plans" but no pre useage charge.
API's have no subscription but a charge per call.
Cost based on the number of  input tokens and output tokens.
Total costs very low for individual calls - large systems scale to higher costs.


VELLUM - ranking and comparing llms.
- developed the birds:feather fish: scale question.

compares context windows with costs of frontier models.
useful when considering business application costs.

Gemini 1.5 Flash - 1M tokens!!!
~ 750,000 words
nearly the complete works of shakespeare!

